[Music]
i feel like the universe
from my experience creates a window
if you do want to change if you do want
help a window is created
now it may not be the window you want
and it may not be this
the fabulous drapes that you want to
open up but there'll be a window
because all of a sudden your mindset is
believing there's a window
and it believes that you can change
[Music]
i hope you guys enjoyed this episode
brought to you by our sponsors
at athletic greens to receive a free
one-year supply of vitamin d and five
free travel packs with your first
purchase visit athleticgreens.com
impact theory enjoy the episode
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of impact theory i
am here with the incredible coach mike
baer coach mike welcome to the show tom
thanks for having me dude i'm super
excited so first of all i was on your
show first
you were so we've got some history we do
and now we're gonna dive into your new
book one decision
which i think at its core has a really
powerful tactic for people to reframe
their life
to get people into what one decision is
and how they can leverage it give us
your definition of one decision
sure so um and my name's mike bear but
people call me coach mike but when i
came out of the womb
the coach wasn't there but you know
you know basically one decision uh
it all comes down to one decision to
change our life that's it what all comes
down to one decision
any change like your happiness though um
well
so i spent years working with drug
addicts alcoholics people with
psychiatric disorders
and years and i own a treatment center
and why do certain people change and get
well
and why do certain people not get well
and
really what it comes down to is making
one decision which is followed up by a
bunch of other decisions
but everything is kind of one decision
away
now it's what decisions matter what
decisions not matter there's 35 000
decisions we make a day so
i wanted to write something this time
around that was all geared around making
it really simple
and not overwhelming for someone and if
they were to get through
the book that by the end of it they can
just make one decision that improves
their life
now is that in the book you put a really
fine point on sort of what the big
one decision is right that you're
pushing people to make
right is that one big one the the big
one is figuring out who you are and
being yourself
you know and my last book best self um
my best self a wizard
so you know it's really identifying who
someone is at their core
and starting from that place it can be
really confusing
for all of us as we get to unpack and
know ourselves a bit more who we are as
we are in your mind do we design who we
are or is this a discovery process
well i think everyone's different so
i think it's always a discovery process
but i think we have to define
moments in our life you know that's kind
of a helpful framework is to figure out
what are the times in our life when we
felt completely connected
and in the moment when did we feel
like we were rooted
in what i would call a spiritual
experience that wasn't outcome based
that wasn't based upon making a bunch of
money but was based about being in this
beautiful moment
and going gosh i'm exactly where i need
to be and this is who i am
so i find it's helpful for people to
first
figure out what are those moments and
that starts to create a framework for
someone realizing
okay those moments i can kind of
describe who i am
so going through the book one of the
things i found most interesting
is the blending of this is a process of
discovery
and now you're in the driver's seat once
you begin to develop that awareness
now we can begin to sort of shift our
force yes the uh you are the king of
acronyms
i love an acronym yes you do and you use
them to very good effect and by the way
the force acronym
i think is incredible and makes up a
huge part of
what makes the book work but before we
define force i just want to get into
this idea of you could be
sort of seeing the world one way you
talk a lot about perspective and your
perspective is going to define your life
and i love that idea help people
understand it more how and what is your
perspective or a perspective
and how does it so color our experience
right so any situation or problem in our
life today
we have a perception of the problem and
sometimes that perception has been
circling around since we were a little
kid
it just all kind of goes back but every
day we have a hint
of looking at it through a certain lens
because our childhood makes up how we
feel
and look at through the world today
unless we go back and we go okay what do
i need to change or shift because that's
not authentically who i
am and so that
perception that isn't working for us we
often go god i hate it when i think that
way or i wish i wouldn't have said that
or that doesn't feel like me
and i think it's incredibly helpful for
someone who wants to improve their life
to realize
that how they look at life i mean the
difference is like when i was writing
this book part of me was like okay
yeah you look through rose-colored
glasses how do you look at life through
a better optic but then i was like all
right well let's take it a step further
and how do we make decisions
from that optic and so i find that
and again my background is working with
drug acts and alcoholics and if you can
get those people to change
who already way beneath the ground uh
you can get anyone to change so this
idea of
your childhood is is is really
determining your
present self which is something like it
freaks me out at a level
that i don't know how to convey because
my
my north star is okay 50 of us is
hardwired there's
just nothing we can do about that yeah
50 is malleable and
when i started this i really wanted it
to be that we're a hundred percent
malleable
and the more you look at the research
the more you experience your own life
the more you realize okay that
nothing experientially tells me that
we're 100 malleable
right but i want to believe that we can
change
dramatically in any aspect of our life
hardwiring or not
and when people talk about childhood
becoming the the single most important
defining element of how you
frame the world perceive the world look
at the world whatever language you want
to use
today as an adult i get super freaked
out so one walk me through
trauma how it sort of locks itself
in and how do we begin to untangle that
in adulthood
well i mean i think the first step is
awareness and why are we doing what
we're doing or why we think the way
we're thinking
and what's working for us and what's not
working for us
how do you help people gain that because
this is an area you're freakishly good
at
well i love assessments i just think
unless you know where you're starting
from you have no idea where you're going
you know so everything i write has
assessments in it because someone needs
to assess their life
and they have to be motivated to change
it i find that i work with a lot of
people
who are unhappy with one area of their
life when really it's another area of
their life they need to improve or they
they just don't want to they're not
motivated to change it so what are some
of the core assessments you walk people
through
uh one is the spheres so it stands for
like social
personal health education
relationships employment and spiritual
development and someone can just rate
from one to ten uh how much
how happy or content or whatever it is
for them they are in that area of
that their life and it just assesses the
starting spot
and looking at what number is lowest um
and then going all right do i want to
change it
am i okay with it you know because
people will often say
oh i'm so unhappy with uh
you know my job but really what they may
be unhappy with
is their spiritual development but they
haven't thought of that
you know until you ask the question
people often don't think about it they
just focus on the problem
but you're right i mean it can be a bit
overwhelming i've done so much listen
i'm a i'm the guy who's been on probably
every psychiatric medication
i'm a recovering drug addict i was a
meth addict i've worked with
all sorts of different people for the
past 18 plus years and
um and i can tell you that we all have a
story
and we all have a story we have to shake
just like you have a story you had a
story
you changed your story the part that was
malleable
and now here we are on impact theory
now if you didn't change the story it
would have just taken a different road
not to say it was so much
better or worse but it wasn't more in
alignment with who you are
awareness is big and when i think about
people having any sort of breakthrough
in their life
you you need that moment do you think
that
as a as somebody who struggled with
addiction did you
get a key insight around awareness and
what you call that window
awareness of what like getting well yeah
like so
the window to me hearing you describe it
in fact tell people what the window is
because i've never heard anybody refer
to it like that and i think it's
the single most powerful insight as to
why people don't get
help even though they've hit rock bottom
like over and over and over
tell people what the window is and then
all well we all we all get windows to
change
there's always opportunities which is
the moment of willingness
the moment of willingness and the moment
of trusting the universe
like people talk about rock bottom i
mean that's just a moment
you know like you could always go lower
in your rock bottom you could lose a
limb
you could like it's just to me a rock
bottom is a moment
of being spiritually deflated defeated
essentially hating your life and it can
always go a bit lower
but there's always a window i feel like
the universe
from my experience creates a window
if you do want to change if you do want
help a window is created
now it may not be the window you want
and it may not be this
fabulous drapes that you want to open up
but there'll be a window
because all of a sudden your mindset is
believing there's a window
and it believes that you can change and
i just think there's
always that opening now the top team may
be shut
talk to me about the window that you
experienced in fact
one thing i haven't heard talk to me
about a window in your drug use period
that you ignored and then walk us
through the window that you ended up
finally going through
so you know i'm part of my story is you
know i'm gay
and uh being gay wasn't easy for me like
i didn't know what it was i did you grow
up
orange county what year high school
graduation
graduating 99 okay i went to modern day
high school which is a big
like sets you up for collegiate
basketball i
was captain of the team i went with the
homecoming queen
i was student body vice president
you know and was popular and i
as i was growing up i did not know what
this thing was like i didn't know what
gay was
honestly like i just didn't know what it
was i didn't understand it
i thought at a certain point i would
start being turned on by women
i heard of this thing in school called
puberty so i thought
okay well i think i hit puberty i'm
growing hair
here like why is this not happening
and that creates a story a story where
you start to feel like you're not enough
you start to for me beat myself up
and you start to not be able to regulate
emotions
and want to find escapes and
you know i
i don't think like one just because of
that was why i ended up
you know choosing to do drugs but it was
incredibly difficult and i had to do a
lot of rewiring and therapy and
trauma work all around that but for me
i look back at you know i sat down with
a therapist
for years and i could have told him what
was haunting me
i never told him like i knew this was
bothering me the window was there for me
to communicate to someone in a safe
space
but i was too scared to step into that
window how old were you when you first
started in therapy
uh 16 okay so because it was
evident to you or evident to your
parents that something was going on
i was the kid who uh was
you know very athletic like i said but i
was you know
going to raves lying to my parents doing
ketamine
at 16. you know i'd go to rage every
weekend
um straight out did they know you were
on drugs or
they just they well i mean i got caught
a few times with weed or
you know back then weed was such a big
deal right you know like oh my
god he smokes weed um or like selling
nitrous oxide balloons i got caught
um but yeah i started going to therapy
um and the window was there a lot of
people
have shame or secrets
about how they look at themselves or
life
and they don't want to tell anyone they
don't want to tell anyone what keeps
them up at night
they don't want to tell anyone what's
haunting them
and if you show up in a setting to get
help
that is the window now it may not be the
therapist in the long run
because no one's perfect no one's god
but
i look back at that moment or i look
back when i was going through outp
i went to play ford at basketball at
fordham in the bronx and like
when i got out there i would go through
outpatients and
you know support groups and um
and again like there's a window to get
help
it's just i wasn't willing to go to any
lengths
i think whenever we make big changes in
our lives
one of the great steps first we have to
get honest
about our life about others we have to
be open to not being god and there's got
to be another way
and we have to become willing and then
it's focus
and if we're able to do that it's kind
of surrendering to win
and so surrendering to win yeah what do
you mean
it's surrendering to this idea that what
we believe
or have believed may not be in our best
interest
and surrendering to a whole new
way of life surrendering to if somebody
is mentoring us
and making suggestions that even though
we don't want to do it
and even though we're like oh that
reminds me of my mom or my dad i'm just
going to do it
and uh and i think
a lot of it is blind faith whenever you
want to make any change in life
and i i just called surrendering to win
you know
fair enough okay so that's the window
that you didn't
take what was the one that you finally
did well
god i mean this is sounds so crazy
i mean look i was a hot mess right so
i don't even know if i should tell this
version because it sounds so
crazy do you want the crazy version or
do you want it a little
tapered i whatever version is most
useful to the person who's watching
right now for whom you are going to be
the window you're going to
give them the permission to seek help
okay so i
i lost my mind on
math i had a sugar mommy
who was a model who like her
fantasy was getting like guys to be with
her because she could get specifically
guys or gay guys so bad
so embarrassing looking back i can't
even believe i was in this spot
in my life you know but like
i had been up for like a week because
you stay up literally for a week
um and it's crazy when you're when you
stay up for even more than a day
right you lose all reality um
and you get paranoid you know that's
part of why it's called sketchiness when
we see people who are
aren't getting well good sleep they're
more emotionally dysregulated
and even if they're not on drugs and
basically
uh i
ah it sounds so weird but i would i
would go to her house
and she would give me drugs and um
[Music]
i one night i went to her house and all
of her art had
devil horns um and all like
all the paintings and there would be
women like naked women with devil horns
and i just thought that was weird and
then she would never let light in her
apartment and she had like three rows of
curtains
and one night we were going to bed
and i went to the bathroom and i noticed
that her window was closed but the
leaves were moving
in the bathroom uh in the pot
and i came back and i said you know i'm
i'm kind of tripping out like
it felt like a weird vibe and then i
looked i i told her i'm looking at the
artwork and i see the head spinning
she goes oh no that's normal that's
that's what goes on you know it's normal
and so i uh we lay down together in bed
uh to go to sleep probably taking a
bunch of xanax or whatever to get
you know she can't sleep really and uh
she leans over and out of her i hear
in this devil voice i got so freaked out
i left i haven't seen her since i mean
it's 20 years ago or whatever
and i literally called everyone i knew
i at the time i was transporting meth
which i'm not proud of
i was a terrible drug dealer because i
would give it all away and i
just was bad like i'd bring it from
orange county in new york
um but i would give it like i literally
put stickers on the plastic bags it
wasn't like
i was like made to be a drug dealer
right i just like
wanted everyone to party with me and um
i went home i threw away all the drugs i
had and then i made a phone call and
shortly after i went to treatment and i
went to
a place in minnesota and i thought i was
going for a month
and then they recommended i stayed for
another four months so i stayed another
four months and then i went to sober
living for five months
and then i worked in coffee shops in the
ymca
and my family no longer was financially
supporting me so i had to get
scholarships
and that was a window at which i was
like i don't know what to do with my
life anymore
like i don't know what to do someone
else
tell me because i'm lost like i'm
completely lost
and that's an example of the window and
we all have windows every day some are
big some are small
but that was a window that changed my
life and shortly after that i became a
counselor and i did interventions and
was there a key
thing that you learned in that window
that allowed you
to stick with this because like you said
at some point it just becomes about
focus but
you know recidivism rates for drug use
is so high
unless the trauma has been processed
was it that were you just processing and
is this centered primarily around
the disconnect of i'm meant to live this
heterosexual life but i'm gay and now
you're coming no
you know what it was it was um i mean
for me it's
it was god good orally direction though
that's some religious good orally
direction that's interesting
so good advice yeah good orally
direction okay
that's my god that's very interesting
and it's a spiritual experience
and i think because i i don't know i
never heard that i could be spiritually
fit as a gay dude growing up
like it was again a new thing i learned
it's not like i could at the time if i
was gay show up in some religion and
they're like come on
in like let's you know let's let's do
something really amazing with
embracing you like i never experienced
that so i kind of
didn't know there was a way to be
spiritually fit
you know i was young and scott sober at
22 but
i've learned that when you want to
change you have to be fully committed
and so um
[Music]
that's just what i'm willing to do when
i want to change
and i i i've had that philosophy i still
have mentors in my life today i still
try to be as coachable as possible
um but it's it's
it's a willingness and it's an openness
it's really like that
what helps someone make lasting change i
went through treatment with
24 other guys and i think like two of us
stayed sober
whoa yeah that is
gnarly yeah thirty thousand dollar a
month rehab
whoa yeah let's talk about athletic
greens the all-in-one daily drink to
support better health and peak
performance with so many stressors in
life it's difficult to maintain
effective nutritional habits and give
our bodies the nutrients it needs
to thrive busy schedules poor sleep
exercise stress or
simply not eating enough of the foods
that your body needs
that's where athletic greens can help
their daily drink is like nutritional
insurance for your body that's delivered
straight
to your door developed from a complex
blend of 75 vitamins
minerals and whole foods sourced
ingredients athletic greens is a greens
powder engineered to help fill the
nutritional gaps in your diet
athletic greens continues to obsessively
improve this
one holistic formula based on the latest
research
producing 53 iterations over the last
decade
and counting it's lifestyle friendly
whether you eat keto
paleo vegan dairy-free or gluten-free
and contains less than one gram of sugar
without compromising on taste
so many people on our team at impact
theory are talking all about their
experiences with athletic greens
they love the taste and how they can get
the micronutrients from various veggies
without having to cook or buy groceries
so when our marketing associate
chase is busy and he knows he's not
going to be able to easily eat any
greens
he can bring along athletic greens and
make sure that he's still
getting adequate micronutrients from the
powder
without having to eat an entire farm's
worth of a salad
so whether you're looking for peak
performance or better health
covering your bases with athletic greens
makes investing in your energy
immunity and gut health each day simple
tasty
and efficient so whether you're looking
for peak performance or better health
covering your bases with athletic greens
makes investing in your energy
immunity and gut health each day simple
tasty and efficient and right now
athletic greens is
doubling down on supporting your immune
system during the winter months
they're offering our audience a free one
year supply of vitamin d
and five travel packs with your first
purchase
simply visit athleticgreens.com
impact theory again that's
athleticgreens.com
impact theory and get your free one-year
supply of vitamin d
and five free travel packs today
all right guys give it a shot take care
and be legendary
okay so you develop was it through
good orally direct good oral direction
that you
learned this idea of if you're gonna do
it do it all the way or is that
uh the sports training just your nature
i think like
i don't know i've i've had this
philosophy in life i'm like i'm a
cockroach you can't get rid of me
you know like i'm like and i just have
this spirit to me that
for me i'm not gonna live this life it's
like
it's a conversation with self and it's a
willingness to learn
like when i was in treatment i had a
notepad
with a pen and i'm taking notes of every
speaker and what they have to say
because if i want to change
i need to be fully committed there's a
saying
in aaa it's half measures available
nothing
and it basically means you can't
half-ass something you can't half-ass
sobriety
and to me it's kind of a life-or-death
situation you
they say you either end up in the jail
which is you know the jails and prisons
are just
the rates of people who where it's drug
you know
crimes and so for me i was like
you know i'm i'm gonna shake this thing
up i'm not gonna i'm not going down
you know and the counselors didn't think
i was gonna stay sober
you know but did did they think that
because they're so used to class after
class of 24 people
reduces down to two or was there
actually something in you at that time
that made you more likely to fail
uh i think because i'm ambitious and i
think that
they thought i think i find that in
treatment as part of the reason i
created my own center was there's a
there's a
it's not a it's not a it's kind of like
you're all you're an addict you're
always an addict
you have a disease you um
get a sober job and then you do the
basics and
it's not an environment that's like yeah
go you know the counselors are underpaid
you know they're probably the first job
i got offered as a counselor to move out
outside of washington was 28 000 a year
for me to go live
in some youth rehab that's
that industry it's not an industry where
they're like let's get you sober and
let's go
freaking make it it's not that and so
if you have that excitement and
that drive uh i think it's just
different
that's really interesting so having your
own center
because i share that with you i'm wildly
ambitious whenever people bring up like
um
you know trauma so you're a workaholic
something like that and i stop and
reflect
like am is this an addictive behavior in
my life
and it does not strike me as that
because i'm very clear on what my
priorities are and i always act in
accordance with my priorities so
if we use the definition of uh an
addiction as something that gives you
short-term
benefit but long-term damage and even in
the face of the long-term damage you
can't stop
that definitely is not me well and in
other criteria is like
uh it's progressive it all uh
you know relationships are affected by
it like there's there's several
elements to um you know and people throw
around
terms you know nowadays especially with
social media
you know and so i bring that up
because is is somebody with your level
of ambition
is there like an element of mania that
you see with
the people that come into treatment
where as soon as the mania for getting
better wears off
they're going to find themselves just
going and needing to numb
out again or have you seen there there
just is no correlation
it's a a problem of the way the industry
perceives itself
and now once we're outside that we're
good well so our center will have like
strictly clinical depression or
debilitating anxiety
and so during covid it went up to
about 75 just primary mental health
wow yeah whereas before it would have
been like 60
chemical dependency the drug addicts
during covid man they've had it
i mean it's unfortunate for them because
families aren't seeing them
they can get away with it checks coming
through
you know that maybe they weren't having
to show up at work you know
not everyone i'm generalizing but like
um
but i think um i think too people who
typically are
addicted to drugs are struggling with
depression they already don't have a
strong belief of themselves
um and so a lot of what
they just want to do is just function
um they haven't been seen for years you
know and that's why
in one decision in kind of my uh
you know who i wrote the book to it's
that person who's alone in their
apartment
it's that person who's scared uh that
you know they're in their 40s and like
what did i make of my life
it's that person that's like just
uh doesn't realize they can have more
it's that person who's who lives in an
inner city and it's just like
what the hell am i supposed to do now
you know my relationships aren't
supporting me and getting to where i
want to get to so
um those are my people you know i love
people that are just struggling because
the the amazing thing about um
mental health and why you know and i've
worked so much not in mental health or
addiction you know
a lot of the work i've done with
entertainers is about helping them live
in their art and creative and
companies i've worked with like it none
of it has to do with addiction that's
it evolved but the thing i love about
people who are struggling
is you can see their light turned on
real quick
i selfishly love seeing people's lights
turn on
you cannot see that physically you can't
see someone
physically go to the gym suddenly
there's a bigger muscle
but you can get someone's light to turn
on who for the past six months
has been miserable
and so like my approach adds humor
creativity
you know it's like when you're able to
kind of laugh at yourself
even when you're suffering it starts to
shift
and so i just that's why i do what i do
you know i just love helping people
turn their lights on and start to
navigate life from that so like that's
like the one decision is
how do i help them turn the light on
it's very tough with a book i write as
if i'm somebody's life coach
i write as if i'm working with someone
and i'm very grateful now i get to do it
on dr phil
and and everything is kind of i never
thought i would be doing this type of
work in this scale but
um i'm just i'm grateful all right so
let's start putting some of these pieces
together and then we're going to get
into the four
o's and force and we'll give people the
specifics that they need to make this
work but
okay so the one decision is authenticity
you've got to decide that you're going
to be yourself so you're not
living a sort of fractured life you're
not hiding this isn't a world of secrets
like you're now
going to be able to process through
things because you're not hiding
under a bunch of [__] so yeah
that's step one two looking for that
window
of healing so that you you have the
willingness and
there is a lifeline of some kind that
you're going to be able to step through
to get the help it could be reading your
book
which you've turned into essentially an
instruction manual so for anybody who's
like i don't have anybody
right um they would very easily be able
to
get the essentials of what we're talking
about now
it doesn't have to be rock bottom it's a
really interesting part of the window
concept
um perspective so how you choose to see
the world one of my favorite quotes is
it doesn't matter what you look at
it matters what you see and your notion
that hey you get to control what you see
and the first way you walk people
through that is
the notion of best self so you want to
decide what you look like as your best
self this there there's a fascinating
duality that you cover in your book
so you sort of present how almost
everything has
the light side the dark side right and
so making sure that people understand
hey you're in this thing over here and
actually may have served you for a while
the drugs may have actually given you
something for a while
and now we're trying to do is move you
out of that the thing that you're
anxious about like
at first it was planning at first it was
being thoughtful about consequences but
now it's turned into something else
right so um you've got the duality which
force sort of
really walks people home but it starts
with that best self so you've got the
who are you at your worst who are you at
your best
yeah your best self and your anti-self
like everyone i have create their best
self
which is an avatar for their life and
yours would be
a wizard of course i have wizards on my
shoe i got wizards on my arm
i got wizards all over my house i need
the reminder
but it becomes this really powerful
constructed narrative yes like when i
hear you talk about
merlin i have an image of who merlin is
in my mind right as a devotee
of sci-fi fantasy like i conjure images
and when i hear you describe it i'm like
oh that's interesting it's not how i
think of wizards
but it doesn't matter right because
you've you've created an icon that
becomes the reminder you can surround
yourself with it what um i've heard
referred to as self-signaling which i
think is
really powerful right uh tell us what
merlin means to you
yeah so so our parents give us names
and then uh but at a spiritual level i
use spirit as like
you know the energy inside of us the
light that turns on you know
gets us in the moment gets us fired up
you know um
it reminds me of like your wife lisa
when she listens to music and she's
belting it out
um and for me it's my
best self is wise compassionate
fun in the moment fearless
driven compassionate and doesn't really
get resentful or bitter or like
can always show up and the reason why
i created best self uh and my best self
as a wizard named merlin
is a reminder when i'm going into
something stressful so
when we aren't our best selves besides
like getting lack of sleep or
all of the you know the basics is
stressful situations
uh event stuff that we need to perform
for it could be a job interview um it
could be
like before i came out here i looked in
myself in the mirror and i said be your
be yourself be your best i say that to
myself because i know that you have a
huge reach and i want to make sure
i'm being authentic and and what it does
is allows one to let go of the outcome
so
sometimes i'll hear people go into
business meetings and go god i should
have done this or that well you can let
go of it if you were just showing up
authentically
so it's a good reminder and then i like
people to create their anti-self that
part of them that's currently getting in
the way in their life
so that they'll recognize it more
readily recognize it
have a understanding of it um
and it's kind of funny so like whereas
normally when we
think of the aspects of ourselves that
we get in our own way
we you know typically
can't laugh at them like mine's a male
witch named angelos and male witches
don't have a lot of friends
and they isolate and they [__] about
the world that's my
own vision of it and i'll be like all
right how do i get more like merlin in
this situation not like angela's
and what i love about this is everyone i
work with they create their own best
self and they create their own anti-self
it's completely authentic
to their own life and what they envision
and it's a really helpful resource
that's free that i've found has
worked wonders in other people's lives
and sometimes i'll work with like
business executives like
companies i did this with the dallas
cowboys
all the rookies you know i did with
fidelity which is a title insurance
company
and people find it really helpful
because
adjectives or descriptions alone
for me included aren't like enough it's
like okay well
you're angry okay well yes i'm angry
okay you're bitter okay but if i'm like
you're acting like if my friends are
like you're acting like angelos
it's kind of funny i'm like you're kind
of right
and it just adds a new you know i love
characters i love
so first step is figuring out who your
best self is
and then it's taking a look at all right
well what problems let's assess your
life and let's
look at uh what is the kind of thinking
that's driving those problems so
like you said i love acronyms so i
create the force
and there's a negative force and a
positive force now
not to say everything in life has to be
like so black and white
right but it's it's a framework that's
helpful for people and it comes out of
uh cognitive distortions which is
cognitive behavioral therapy
which has been around forever it's the
most widely used
type of therapy and anywhere in the
world
um and i what i wanted to do was create
a coaching
language for it because it can be pretty
complex
and it also takes a very long time to do
a lot of sessions of
cognitive behavioral therapy so the
force is
the negative force stands for fortune
telling so f-o-r-c-e
the forces done twice yep okay so the
positive side
were you doing positive or negative i
can do negative first or so the negative
would be fortune telling
over generalizing rigidity or right
fighting
uh confusion and emotional reasoning
typically from my experience one of
those five things
is what affects someone's perception it
usually falls into one of those
categories
and the flip side is the hack so
whenever when
anyone's feeling like they're in that
negative force they can go all right
where am i in this list and the positive
is fact finding objective thinking
relaxed or relaxed thinking clarified
purpose
and evidence-based reasoning
now the cool thing about seeing it in
the book that's going to be hard for
people that are just listening to this
is you actually break it out into a
matrix
and you show people like here's the f
negative here's the f positive the o
negative the o positive
right and it really makes it
easy to go okay wait identify going back
to your point about awareness identify
what what am i derailing on right now
what has shifted my perspective
that's pushed me into the negative force
right identify which of the letters
you're at
and then cool what's its correlate on
the positive side and
much like the merlin example of of
actually coming up with an avatar for
your best self so that it contains like
you said it's a shorthand for a whole
lot of things
right so you know how to sort of step
into that i think it's so powerful
uh they when you have that matrix in
your mind
you're able to go okay this is a c
problem boom i'm going to jump from the
negative c to the positive c
oh man this is i'm i'm totally in
emotional reasoning
i need to move over to fact based yeah
or evidence-based because it's an e
yeah uh it's really
useful this is one of those times where
um i think verbal alone
i know won't quite get people one one
one way to look at it is like
uh we like you've shown up at events we
all have where you're confu
and it or you know where when an event
still existed
what am i doing here it could be
someone's party it could be at someone's
house and it's just confusing it's like
how long do i need to stay or whatever
well
usually the reason why we feel that way
is we don't know the purpose for being
there
we're like lost like if we can clarify
the purpose oh it's their birthday and
i'm showing up for them because i love
them
oh the purpose is for networking because
when we're in confusion we just check
out
right and so it's just that's like a
simple example but giving people a
reminder these are the two c's
so you have confusion is the c on force
negative and then you have clarity of
purpose as the c
and the force positive yeah and so you
begin to go
man why am i here oh [__] that's
confusion i'm in the c
i'm back in force what is the correlate
that'll allow me to this goes back to
your very first statement about
perspective shapes your world it's like
the first sentence in your book
yeah and so it's like okay wait this is
about perspective
i have my moment of awareness here is my
window of opportunity
recognize what c i'm in okay i'm
confused right
now all i need is clarity of purpose to
understand do i stay do i go
okay this is about being a good friend
okay rad like what how would a friend
show up in this moment
how do i figure that out my best self
who in your case is tattooed on my arm
what would merlin do in this situation
right and and merlin is me right and so
it's like me
at my best how would i want to show up
it's such a cool
rubric for allowing people to just sort
of
put their finger somewhere on a chart
right which is why i found it
so helpful like i'm all about
instruction manuals
and i'm about instruction manuals
written by the people who struggled
right because if it came easy to you i
don't want you writing my instructions
because you're not going to know where
i'm going to get tripped up
right and it's like i want to know where
am i going to fall yeah
and so force and you spend a lot of time
in the book walking people through it so
for anybody who's
listening to this or watching this know
get the book you can see
like you take them through it in several
different ways stories about people that
were struggling with a given
letter and how you helped them find you
know
what they needed to transition to from
the negative to the positive
yeah you lay it out in the chart you
give them the definitions
and it becomes sort of that cheat sheet
that i think people need in the
beginning
well and and what i did was i put a
a post out on facebook so i had about i
don't know
40 strangers showing up in my house
where i said i'm going to help you make
one decision
in 40 minutes and so i had i recorded
all of them
and i still have the recordings i'm like
ah should i turn into something but i
basically
whatever i put out i want to make sure
it works like
to the best of its ability with the
widest range of people
so i would have people show up on my
house and then we would figure out what
force they were getting stuck in you
know what was their problem
who their best self was what force were
they stuck in and then what was the one
decision they needed to make
to get into who they truly are and what
they want to live
like you know i so i i test out
everything like i'll throw self-help
dinner parties you know
just trying to make sure that it's
really bulletproof
and um and yeah
your thank you for articulating this all
so great
you know i'm literally spewing what you
put in the book no but you
you're actually like you get it you know
you actually
get where the framework of where i'm
going with it and you're even saying
a lot of it better than me so i
appreciate it um so i appreciate the
kind words but it
really is there it's yeah the coolest
description i heard of
the sort of magic that you do and how
you're able to i've heard you talk about
hey i'm on the dr phil show which you're
on all the time
um i have two minutes before the next
commercial break to help this person
have this huge breakthrough
and yeah i heard somebody
like sort of realize in real time as you
did it with them on their show
and they were like oh my god i get what
you're doing you're not giving me a new
puzzle piece
you're making me aware of the fact that
there are puzzle pieces
and showing me how to rearrange them and
i thought oh my god that actually
is what you're doing like you're helping
people understand
f o r c e the positive the negative
and you should define the four o's
because i keep making sort of oblique
references to it because that's also
useful
but give people that because it's
another piece of the puzzle sure so the
the four o's is
and we hear about a lot lately it's it's
kind of like
obstacle or opportunity right is it
every obstacle is an opportunity in
disguise
right like we hear it and then it's kind
of like okay well
yes and i also think it's important that
we
i like to write things out like and i
find when i'm working with people when
they write it out
it's it's helpful so yes it's looking at
what's the obstacle which is a no
what's the opportunity you know in that
obstacle
and because you can't move on to
anything else because if you so the four
o's there's
obstacle opportunity one decision
outcome
when we make a decision from an obstacle
mindset
we aren't going to be aligned with who
we really are and we're probably
at the end not going to get the outcome
that we're going to be acceptable with
because we may look back and be like why
did i do that
that's not uh i should have said it
differently
if we can view it as an opportunity it
feels better
it's more in alignment with who we are
we make the one decision
and we can let go of the outcome and i
do something too where i
i basically go like okay here's the
obstacle
here's the opportunity the nose is one
decision
if you make it from an obstacle it's
unhappy universe decided
unhappy that's a you if you make it from
an opportunity mindset
the universe is happier because it's who
you are i do that more with like kids
and younger people so they can start to
learn
but um that is the four o's it's
obstacle opportunity one decision
outcome
how do you get people to see obstacles
as opportunities
depends who it is so um
it really give me one without saying who
they are people love celebrities yes
give me one from a celebrity client you
worked with
where was like all they could see was
the obstacle
um i worked with someone that was doing
a reinvention
who's a singer male and they
were bullied so much cyberbullied in
their career
even though they're incredibly cool but
they were like
destroyed to the point where when they
were relaunching reinventing their
career
they were paralyzed like they couldn't
figure out their fashion they couldn't
figure out their music
they were associating with people that
weren't really in alignment with who
they were but they like
looked cool and they had an opportunity
to
be on a television show and they weren't
going to do it because they
didn't make them look cool enough and
they were driven
by this optic of people who aren't going
to buy their stuff anyways
and so the obstacle was trying to get
them to
realize that uh
the obstacle was them getting in their
own way from
being destroyed on social media
the opportunity was them
looking at the opportunities in front of
them and realizing what's important to
them and that they were capable and that
they could uh have a different
experience and that the most important
thing was
who they are and the relationships in
their life and
long story short they made one decision
to do the show and
their social friends changed everything
got better and it relaunched their
career
they wanted vma like everything kind of
rebounded but
uh and i put that in my first book best
self and it's
every story in any of my books are real
like i'm
so committed that everything has to be
real that like i even will send it to
the people who the stories are about
even if i change their names and in best
self his character was a ralph which was
a squirrel that was his best self
and his squirrel got him through that's
so interesting god i want to know
people's like
what they define as their best self i
could never in a million years equate my
best self to a squirrel
like that would so demotivate me yeah
but the fact
and i love that right that everybody's
got their own frame of reference
and they find something interesting that
i don't um
that's really interesting why'd you stop
working with celebrities
ah lord
um i spent so much of my life doing it
and i think that um
at a certain point you know we
we like to do what feeds our our soul
um and i've traveled the world
from malaysia to africa to brazil
and you know it's interesting i
three years ago two and a half years ago
i went to
uh my first refugee camp in kurdistan
and uh yeah and then i started going
back alone and working with the
government i was going to open up a
mental health plan did you end up there
well i went with a client of mine and
the intention was we were going to
try to do some work you know sell merch
on their tour
uh and i wanted to you know i was in
charge of like charitable efforts and i
thought this was like
let's go to the most underserved people
on the planet like not on the play but
it's pretty underserved i mean their
husbands have been beheaded
daughters sold for sex trafficking like
it's
it's gnarly if that's not the worst i
don't want to meet
the worst that's freakish yeah it's
freakish and
i went and then i got really passionate
about it
like i started working with
the barzani's and like going to
kurdistan and that's the government
and i was going to open up a mental
health clinic
for uh what was it in the hook
and i was so
obsessed with it i like when i work with
talent i get obsessed with working with
the talent like i get i'll write and
i'll create and
you know i've helped them create tour
concepts and living in their art and how
they express themselves i
like i love it right i complain that all
day and i went to kurdistan
and it was just
awful and they have no therapy
none like there's no therapy these women
have like
been moved from their homes in syria
they're now in a refugee camp
with nothing with like kids some of them
aren't with them anymore
husband's dead and i was like god these
people like
how could i create some hope for them
and and then i flew back to la
and i thought that i could rally all my
friends and people i'd worked with
to support mental health clinics in
kurdistan what i found
is publicists and a lot of people in
hollywood aren't really interested in
helping people in kurdistan
iraq and so i had this moment where i
was like
why am i trying to get famous people
to do what i want to do
like how cool would it be if i became
my own vehicle and i was the first time
i had that thought
like even back like
and like jennifer lopez's good friend of
mine she like tagged me on instagram i
don't even have instagram
in hindsight i'm like oh my god i wish i
would have had instagram you know cause
like
i don't know i probably would have you
know whatever but like
i didn't have that thought i didn't
understand why anyone would want to be
more well-known um unless they were like
music i i got it with like musicians and
stuff but i just had worked in hollywood
for so long i was like
why would anyone want to do this and um
and so when i came back then i was like
what if i became
the vehicle and all of a sudden such a
trip like two weeks later
i was throwing this charity event on a
music tour
where there was a self-help meeting in
every city and the city in la dr phil
spoke
and uh we connected
and we got lunch and then
like a week later and he asked me to go
on a show i went on a show two days
later
now i've been on over 40 episodes and he
told me mike you need to write a book
so i wrote a book made in new york times
and he's like you need to write another
book
wrote another book i mean new york times
and then all of a sudden i started
speaking so this is like
like this is the last two and a half
years and
why i stopped working with celebrities
it's like i can't
i can't grow my own brand and work with
celebrities i found for myself because i
feel too conflicted
like i don't want them ever to feel like
hey sorry i gotta go on this podcast i'd
love to talk to you about
your relationship you know because i'm
pretty loose and flexible
and i make myself completely available
and i just realized i could have more
impact if and i have a message
like and i've helped people and i
and i think i also probably was just
over it like once you start
i don't i don't sugarcoat and i don't
like want to like i don't
and it's probably you know this manager
used to say to me he always said mike
you're not impressed by people and
like i'm impressed but it's not people
aren't
it's a very strange thing like
the the the narcissism of entertainment
at a certain point for me it's just not
attractive like i don't
i don't i'm friends with some people but
it's it's
i'm more interested in like
the neighbor like i just am more
passionate that's why i love being on dr
phillips we don't work with celebrities
we work with everyday people who are
looking for help
and for me that's like and that lights
me up
well speaking of turning people's lights
on yeah where can they find you
uh coach mike baer
is my uh website same with like youtube
i have a podcast
always evolving which you went on um
but yeah building out the youtube page
i'm doing a new series called one
decision try something new
where every week it's me trying
something new to hopefully inspire
others to try something new
nice yeah so i just did ballet knitting
i'd never knitted before
you know but they're kind of fun um but
yeah social media same coach mike bear
very cool yeah all right guys trust me
when i say that you're going to want to
read the book
one decision is absolutely fantastic and
speaking of things that are fantastic if
you haven't already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
change is really hard change is like oh
yeah just get inspired and change
oh no no no i mean there are fields of
study looking at change
and change has a you know
pre-contemplative contemplative
execution and maintenance
the maintenance have changed that most
people leave out and most people are not
able to maintain change